<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">


<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 35</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
      Chapter XXXIII. Edward as King.
    </h2>
<p>
      Miles Hendon was picturesque enough before he got into the riot on London
      Bridge—he was more so when he got out of it.  He had but little
      money when he got in, none at all when he got out.  The pickpockets
      had stripped him of his last farthing.
    </p>
<p>
      But no matter, so he found his boy.  Being a soldier, he did not go
      at his task in a random way, but set to work, first of all, to arrange his
      campaign.
    </p>
<p>
      What would the boy naturally do?  Where would he naturally go? Well—argued
      Miles—he would naturally go to his former haunts, for that is the
      instinct of unsound minds, when homeless and forsaken, as well as of sound
      ones.  Whereabouts were his former haunts?  His rags, taken
      together with the low villain who seemed to know him and who even claimed
      to be his father, indicated that his home was in one or another of the
      poorest and meanest districts of London.  Would the search for him be
      difficult, or long?  No, it was likely to be easy and brief.  He
      would not hunt for the boy, he would hunt for a crowd; in the centre of a
      big crowd or a little one, sooner or later, he should find his poor little
      friend, sure; and the mangy mob would be entertaining itself with
      pestering and aggravating the boy, who would be proclaiming himself King,
      as usual.  Then Miles Hendon would cripple some of those people, and
      carry off his little ward, and comfort and cheer him with loving words,
      and the two would never be separated any more.
    </p>
<p>
      So Miles started on his quest.  Hour after hour he tramped through
      back alleys and squalid streets, seeking groups and crowds, and finding no
      end of them, but never any sign of the boy.  This greatly surprised
      him, but did not discourage him.  To his notion, there was nothing
      the matter with his plan of campaign; the only miscalculation about it was
      that the campaign was becoming a lengthy one, whereas he had expected it
      to be short.
    </p>
<p>
      When daylight arrived, at last, he had made many a mile, and canvassed
      many a crowd, but the only result was that he was tolerably tired, rather
      hungry and very sleepy.  He wanted some breakfast, but there was no
      way to get it.  To beg for it did not occur to him; as to pawning his
      sword, he would as soon have thought of parting with his honour; he could
      spare some of his clothes—yes, but one could as easily find a
      customer for a disease as for such clothes.
    </p>
<p>
      At noon he was still tramping—among the rabble which followed after
      the royal procession, now; for he argued that this regal display would
      attract his little lunatic powerfully.  He followed the pageant
      through all its devious windings about London, and all the way to
      Westminster and the Abbey.  He drifted here and there amongst the
      multitudes that were massed in the vicinity for a weary long time, baffled
      and perplexed, and finally wandered off, thinking, and trying to contrive
      some way to better his plan of campaign.  By-and-by, when he came to
      himself out of his musings, he discovered that the town was far behind him
      and that the day was growing old.  He was near the river, and in the
      country; it was a region of fine rural seats—not the sort of
      district to welcome clothes like his.
    </p>
<p>
      It was not at all cold; so he stretched himself on the ground in the lee
      of a hedge to rest and think.  Drowsiness presently began to settle
      upon his senses; the faint and far-off boom of cannon was wafted to his
      ear, and he said to himself, “The new King is crowned,” and
      straightway fell asleep.  He had not slept or rested, before, for
      more than thirty hours. He did not wake again until near the middle of the
      next morning.
    </p>
<p>
      He got up, lame, stiff, and half famished, washed himself in the river,
      stayed his stomach with a pint or two of water, and trudged off toward
      Westminster, grumbling at himself for having wasted so much time.  Hunger
      helped him to a new plan, now; he would try to get speech with old Sir
      Humphrey Marlow and borrow a few marks, and—but that was enough of a
      plan for the present; it would be time enough to enlarge it when this
      first stage should be accomplished.
    </p>
<p>
      Toward eleven o’clock he approached the palace; and although a host
      of showy people were about him, moving in the same direction, he was not
      inconspicuous—his costume took care of that.  He watched these
      people’s faces narrowly, hoping to find a charitable one whose
      possessor might be willing to carry his name to the old lieutenant—as
      to trying to get into the palace himself, that was simply out of the
      question.
    </p>
<p>
      Presently our whipping-boy passed him, then wheeled about and scanned his
      figure well, saying to himself, “An’ that is not the very
      vagabond his Majesty is in such a worry about, then am I an ass—though
      belike I was that before.  He answereth the description to a rag—that
      God should make two such would be to cheapen miracles by wasteful
      repetition.  I would I could contrive an excuse to speak with him.”
    </p>
<p>
      Miles Hendon saved him the trouble; for he turned about, then, as a man
      generally will when somebody mesmerises him by gazing hard at him from
      behind; and observing a strong interest in the boy’s eyes, he
      stepped toward him and said—
    </p>
<p>
      “You have just come out from the palace; do you belong there?”
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, your worship.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Know you Sir Humphrey Marlow?”
    </p>
<p>
      The boy started, and said to himself, “Lord! mine old departed
      father!” Then he answered aloud, “Right well, your worship.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Good—is he within?”
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes,” said the boy; and added, to himself, “within his
      grave.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Might I crave your favour to carry my name to him, and say I beg to
      say a word in his ear?”
    </p>
<p>
      “I will despatch the business right willingly, fair sir.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Then say Miles Hendon, son of Sir Richard, is here without—I
      shall be greatly bounden to you, my good lad.”
    </p>
<p>
      The boy looked disappointed.  "The King did not name him so,”
      he said to himself; “but it mattereth not, this is his twin brother,
      and can give his Majesty news of t’other Sir-Odds-and-Ends, I
      warrant.”  So he said to Miles, “Step in there a moment,
      good sir, and wait till I bring you word.”
    </p>
<p>
      Hendon retired to the place indicated—it was a recess sunk in the
      palace wall, with a stone bench in it—a shelter for sentinels in bad
      weather. He had hardly seated himself when some halberdiers, in charge of
      an officer, passed by.  The officer saw him, halted his men, and
      commanded Hendon to come forth.  He obeyed, and was promptly arrested
      as a suspicious character prowling within the precincts of the palace.
       Things began to look ugly.  Poor Miles was going to explain,
      but the officer roughly silenced him, and ordered his men to disarm him
      and search him.
    </p>
<p>
      “God of his mercy grant that they find somewhat,” said poor
      Miles; “I have searched enow, and failed, yet is my need greater
      than theirs.”
    </p>
<p>
      Nothing was found but a document.  The officer tore it open, and
      Hendon smiled when he recognised the ‘pot-hooks’ made by his
      lost little friend that black day at Hendon Hall.  The officer’s
      face grew dark as he read the English paragraph, and Miles blenched to the
      opposite colour as he listened.
    </p>
<p>
      “Another new claimant of the Crown!” cried the officer.  "Verily
      they breed like rabbits, to-day.  Seize the rascal, men, and see ye
      keep him fast whilst I convey this precious paper within and send it to
      the King.”
    </p>
<p>
      He hurried away, leaving the prisoner in the grip of the halberdiers.
    </p>
<p>
      “Now is my evil luck ended at last,” muttered Hendon, “for
      I shall dangle at a rope’s end for a certainty, by reason of that
      bit of writing.  And what will become of my poor lad!—ah, only
      the good God knoweth.”
    </p>
<p>
      By-and-by he saw the officer coming again, in a great hurry; so he plucked
      his courage together, purposing to meet his trouble as became a man.
       The officer ordered the men to loose the prisoner and return his
      sword to him; then bowed respectfully, and said—
    </p>
<p>
      “Please you, sir, to follow me.”
    </p>
<p>
      Hendon followed, saying to himself, “An’ I were not travelling
      to death and judgment, and so must needs economise in sin, I would
      throttle this knave for his mock courtesy.”
    </p>
<p>
      The two traversed a populous court, and arrived at the grand entrance of
      the palace, where the officer, with another bow, delivered Hendon into the
      hands of a gorgeous official, who received him with profound respect and
      led him forward through a great hall, lined on both sides with rows of
      splendid flunkeys (who made reverential obeisance as the two passed along,
      but fell into death-throes of silent laughter at our stately scarecrow the
      moment his back was turned), and up a broad staircase, among flocks of
      fine folk, and finally conducted him into a vast room, clove a passage for
      him through the assembled nobility of England, then made a bow, reminded
      him to take his hat off, and left him standing in the middle of the room,
      a mark for all eyes, for plenty of indignant frowns, and for a sufficiency
      of amused and derisive smiles.
    </p>
<p>
      Miles Hendon was entirely bewildered.  There sat the young King,
      under a canopy of state, five steps away, with his head bent down and
      aside, speaking with a sort of human bird of paradise—a duke, maybe.
       Hendon observed to himself that it was hard enough to be sentenced
      to death in the full vigour of life, without having this peculiarly public
      humiliation added.  He wished the King would hurry about it—some
      of the gaudy people near by were becoming pretty offensive.  At this
      moment the King raised his head slightly, and Hendon caught a good view of
      his face. The sight nearly took his breath away!—He stood gazing at
      the fair young face like one transfixed; then presently ejaculated—
    </p>
<p>
      “Lo, the Lord of the Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows on his throne!”
    </p>
<p>
      He muttered some broken sentences, still gazing and marvelling; then
      turned his eyes around and about, scanning the gorgeous throng and the
      splendid saloon, murmuring, “But these are <i>real</i>—verily
      these are <i>real</i>—surely it is not a dream.”
    </p>
<p>
      He stared at the King again—and thought, “<i>Is</i> it a dream
      . . . or <i>is</i> he the veritable Sovereign of England, and not the
      friendless poor Tom o’ Bedlam I took him for—who shall solve
      me this riddle?”
    </p>
<p>
      A sudden idea flashed in his eye, and he strode to the wall, gathered up a
      chair, brought it back, planted it on the floor, and sat down in it!
    </p>
<p>
      A buzz of indignation broke out, a rough hand was laid upon him and a
      voice exclaimed—
    </p>
<p>
      “Up, thou mannerless clown! would’st sit in the presence of
      the King?”
    </p>
<p>
      The disturbance attracted his Majesty’s attention, who stretched
      forth his hand and cried out—
    </p>
<p>
      “Touch him not, it is his right!”
    </p>
<p>
      The throng fell back, stupefied.  The King went on—
    </p>
<p>
      “Learn ye all, ladies, lords, and gentlemen, that this is my trusty
      and well-beloved servant, Miles Hendon, who interposed his good sword and
      saved his prince from bodily harm and possible death—and for this he
      is a knight, by the King’s voice.  Also learn, that for a
      higher service, in that he saved his sovereign stripes and shame, taking
      these upon himself, he is a peer of England, Earl of Kent, and shall have
      gold and lands meet for the dignity.  More—the privilege which
      he hath just exercised is his by royal grant; for we have ordained that
      the chiefs of his line shall have and hold the right to sit in the
      presence of the Majesty of England henceforth, age after age, so long as
      the crown shall endure.  Molest him not.”
    </p>
<p>
      Two persons, who, through delay, had only arrived from the country during
      this morning, and had now been in this room only five minutes, stood
      listening to these words and looking at the King, then at the scarecrow,
      then at the King again, in a sort of torpid bewilderment.  These were
      Sir Hugh and the Lady Edith.  But the new Earl did not see them.
       He was still staring at the monarch, in a dazed way, and muttering—
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, body o’ me!  <i>this</i> my pauper!  This my
      lunatic!  This is he whom <i>I</i> would show what grandeur was, in
      my house of seventy rooms and seven-and-twenty servants!  This is he
      who had never known aught but rags for raiment, kicks for comfort, and
      offal for diet!  This is he whom <i>I</i> adopted and would make
      respectable! Would God I had a bag to hide my head in!”
    </p>
<p>
      Then his manners suddenly came back to him, and he dropped upon his knees,
      with his hands between the King’s, and swore allegiance and did
      homage for his lands and titles.  Then he rose and stood respectfully
      aside, a mark still for all eyes—and much envy, too.
    </p>
<p>
      Now the King discovered Sir Hugh, and spoke out with wrathful voice and
      kindling eye—
    </p>
<p>
      “Strip this robber of his false show and stolen estates, and put him
      under lock and key till I have need of him.”
    </p>
<p>
      The late Sir Hugh was led away.
    </p>
<p>
      There was a stir at the other end of the room, now; the assemblage fell
      apart, and Tom Canty, quaintly but richly clothed, marched down, between
      these living walls, preceded by an usher.  He knelt before the King,
      who said—
    </p>
<p>
      “I have learned the story of these past few weeks, and am well
      pleased with thee.  Thou hast governed the realm with right royal
      gentleness and mercy.  Thou hast found thy mother and thy sisters
      again?  Good; they shall be cared for—and thy father shall
      hang, if thou desire it and the law consent.  Know, all ye that hear
      my voice, that from this day, they that abide in the shelter of Christ’s
      Hospital and share the King’s bounty shall have their minds and
      hearts fed, as well as their baser parts; and this boy shall dwell there,
      and hold the chief place in its honourable body of governors, during life.
       And for that he hath been a king, it is meet that other than common
      observance shall be his due; wherefore note this his dress of state, for
      by it he shall be known, and none shall copy it; and wheresoever he shall
      come, it shall remind the people that he hath been royal, in his time, and
      none shall deny him his due of reverence or fail to give him salutation.
       He hath the throne’s protection, he hath the crown’s
      support, he shall be known and called by the honourable title of the King’s
      Ward.”
    </p>
<p>
      The proud and happy Tom Canty rose and kissed the King’s hand, and
      was conducted from the presence.  He did not waste any time, but flew
      to his mother, to tell her and Nan and Bet all about it and get them to
      help him enjoy the great news. {1}
    </p>
<p>
      Conclusion. Justice and retribution.
    </p>
<p>
      When the mysteries were all cleared up, it came out, by confession of Hugh
      Hendon, that his wife had repudiated Miles by his command, that day at
      Hendon Hall—a command assisted and supported by the perfectly
      trustworthy promise that if she did not deny that he was Miles Hendon, and
      stand firmly to it, he would have her life; whereupon she said, “Take
      it!”—she did not value it—and she would not repudiate
      Miles; then the husband said he would spare her life but have Miles
      assassinated!  This was a different matter; so she gave her word and
      kept it.
    </p>
<p>
      Hugh was not prosecuted for his threats or for stealing his brother’s
      estates and title, because the wife and brother would not testify against
      him—and the former would not have been allowed to do it, even if she
      had wanted to.  Hugh deserted his wife and went over to the
      continent, where he presently died; and by-and-by the Earl of Kent married
      his relict. There were grand times and rejoicings at Hendon village when
      the couple paid their first visit to the Hall.
    </p>
<p>
      Tom Canty’s father was never heard of again.
    </p>
<p>
      The King sought out the farmer who had been branded and sold as a slave,
      and reclaimed him from his evil life with the Ruffler’s gang, and
      put him in the way of a comfortable livelihood.
    </p>
<p>
      He also took that old lawyer out of prison and remitted his fine. He
      provided good homes for the daughters of the two Baptist women whom he saw
      burned at the stake, and roundly punished the official who laid the
      undeserved stripes upon Miles Hendon’s back.
    </p>
<p>
      He saved from the gallows the boy who had captured the stray falcon, and
      also the woman who had stolen a remnant of cloth from a weaver; but he was
      too late to save the man who had been convicted of killing a deer in the
      royal forest.
    </p>
<p>
      He showed favour to the justice who had pitied him when he was supposed to
      have stolen a pig, and he had the gratification of seeing him grow in the
      public esteem and become a great and honoured man.
    </p>
<p>
      As long as the King lived he was fond of telling the story of his
      adventures, all through, from the hour that the sentinel cuffed him away
      from the palace gate till the final midnight when he deftly mixed himself
      into a gang of hurrying workmen and so slipped into the Abbey and climbed
      up and hid himself in the Confessor’s tomb, and then slept so long,
      next day, that he came within one of missing the Coronation altogether.
       He said that the frequent rehearsing of the precious lesson kept him
      strong in his purpose to make its teachings yield benefits to his people;
      and so, whilst his life was spared he should continue to tell the story,
      and thus keep its sorrowful spectacles fresh in his memory and the springs
      of pity replenished in his heart.
    </p>
<p>
      Miles Hendon and Tom Canty were favourites of the King, all through his
      brief reign, and his sincere mourners when he died. The good Earl of Kent
      had too much sense to abuse his peculiar privilege; but he exercised it
      twice after the instance we have seen of it before he was called from this
      world—once at the accession of Queen Mary, and once at the accession
      of Queen Elizabeth.  A descendant of his exercised it at the
      accession of James I.  Before this one’s son chose to use the
      privilege, near a quarter of a century had elapsed, and the ‘privilege
      of the Kents’ had faded out of most people’s memories; so,
      when the Kent of that day appeared before Charles I. and his court and sat
      down in the sovereign’s presence to assert and perpetuate the right
      of his house, there was a fine stir indeed!  But the matter was soon
      explained, and the right confirmed.  The last Earl of the line fell
      in the wars of the Commonwealth fighting for the King, and the odd
      privilege ended with him.
    </p>
<p>
      Tom Canty lived to be a very old man, a handsome, white-haired old fellow,
      of grave and benignant aspect.  As long as he lasted he was honoured;
      and he was also reverenced, for his striking and peculiar costume kept the
      people reminded that ‘in his time he had been royal;’ so,
      wherever he appeared the crowd fell apart, making way for him, and
      whispering, one to another, “Doff thy hat, it is the King’s
      Ward!”—and so they saluted, and got his kindly smile in return—and
      they valued it, too, for his was an honourable history.
    </p>
<p>
      Yes, King Edward VI. lived only a few years, poor boy, but he lived them
      worthily.  More than once, when some great dignitary, some gilded
      vassal of the crown, made argument against his leniency, and urged that
      some law which he was bent upon amending was gentle enough for its
      purpose, and wrought no suffering or oppression which any one need
      mightily mind, the young King turned the mournful eloquence of his great
      compassionate eyes upon him and answered—
    </p>
<p>
      “What dost <i>thou</i> know of suffering and oppression?  I and
      my people know, but not thou.”
    </p>
<p>
      The reign of Edward VI. was a singularly merciful one for those harsh
      times.  Now that we are taking leave of him, let us try to keep this
      in our minds, to his credit.
    </p>
<h2>
      FOOTNOTES AND TWAIN’S NOTES
    </h2>
<p>
      {1}  For Mark Twain’s note see below under the relevant chapter
      heading.
    </p>
<p>
      {2}  He refers to the order of baronets, or baronettes; the barones
      minores, as distinct from the parliamentary barons—not, it need
      hardly be said, to the baronets of later creation.
    </p>
<p>
      {3}  The lords of Kingsale, descendants of De Courcy, still enjoy
      this curious privilege.
    </p>
<p>
      {4}  Hume.
    </p>
<p>
      {5}  Ib.
    </p>
<p>
      {6}  Leigh Hunt’s ‘The Town,’ p.408, quotation from
      an early tourist.
    </p>
<p>
      {7}  Canting terms for various kinds of thieves, beggars and
      vagabonds, and their female companions.
    </p>
<p>
      {8}  From ‘The English Rogue.’  London, 1665.
    </p>
<p>
      {9}  Hume’s England.
    </p>
<p>
      {10}  See Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull’s Blue Laws, True and False,
      p. 11.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 1, Chapter IV. Christ’s Hospital Costume.
    </p>
<p>
      It is most reasonable to regard the dress as copied from the costume of
      the citizens of London of that period, when long blue coats were the
      common habit of apprentices and serving-men, and yellow stockings were
      generally worn; the coat fits closely to the body, but has loose sleeves,
      and beneath is worn a sleeveless yellow under-coat; around the waist is a
      red leathern girdle; a clerical band around the neck, and a small flat
      black cap, about the size of a saucer, completes the costume.—Timbs’
      Curiosities of London.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 2, Chapter IV.
    </p>
<p>
      It appears that Christ’s Hospital was not originally founded as a <i>school</i>;
      its object was to rescue children from the streets, to shelter, feed,
      clothe them.—Timbs’ Curiosities of London.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 3, Chapter V. The Duke of Norfolk’s Condemnation
      commanded.
    </p>
<p>
      The King was now approaching fast towards his end; and fearing lest
      Norfolk should escape him, he sent a message to the Commons, by which he
      desired them to hasten the Bill, on pretence that Norfolk enjoyed the
      dignity of Earl Marshal, and it was necessary to appoint another, who
      might officiate at the ensuing ceremony of installing his son Prince of
      Wales.—Hume’s History of England, vol. iii. p. 307.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 4, Chapter VII.
    </p>
<p>
      It was not till the end of this reign (Henry VIII.) that any salads,
      carrots, turnips, or other edible roots were produced in England.  The
      little of these vegetables that was used was formerly imported from
      Holland and Flanders.  Queen Catherine, when she wanted a salad, was
      obliged to despatch a messenger thither on purpose.—Hume’s
      History of England, vol. iii. p. 314.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 5, Chapter VIII. Attainder of Norfolk.
    </p>
<p>
      The House of Peers, without examining the prisoner, without trial or
      evidence, passed a Bill of Attainder against him and sent it down to the
      Commons . . . The obsequious Commons obeyed his (the King’s)
      directions; and the King, having affixed the Royal assent to the Bill by
      commissioners, issued orders for the execution of Norfolk on the morning
      of January 29 (the next day).—Hume’s History of England, vol
      iii. p 306.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 6, Chapter X. The Loving-cup.
    </p>
<p>
      The loving-cup, and the peculiar ceremonies observed in drinking from it,
      are older than English history.  It is thought that both are Danish
      importations.  As far back as knowledge goes, the loving-cup has
      always been drunk at English banquets.  Tradition explains the
      ceremonies in this way.  In the rude ancient times it was deemed a
      wise precaution to have both hands of both drinkers employed, lest while
      the pledger pledged his love and fidelity to the pledgee, the pledgee take
      that opportunity to slip a dirk into him!
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 7, Chapter XI. The Duke of Norfolk’s narrow
      Escape.
    </p>
<p>
      Had Henry VIII. survived a few hours longer, his order for the duke’s
      execution would have been carried into effect. ‘But news being
      carried to the Tower that the King himself had expired that night, the
      lieutenant deferred obeying the warrant; and it was not thought advisable
      by the Council to begin a new reign by the death of the greatest nobleman
      in the kingdom, who had been condemned by a sentence so unjust and
      tyrannical.’—Hume’s History of England, vol. iii, p.
      307.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 8, Chapter XIV. The Whipping-boy.
    </p>
<p>
      James I. and Charles II. had whipping-boys, when they were little fellows,
      to take their punishment for them when they fell short in their lessons;
      so I have ventured to furnish my small prince with one, for my own
      purposes.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTES to Chapter XV.
    </p>
<p>
      Character of Hertford.
    </p>
<p>
      The young King discovered an extreme attachment to his uncle, who was, in
      the main, a man of moderation and probity.—Hume’s History of
      England, vol. iii, p324.
    </p>
<p>
      But if he (the Protector) gave offence by assuming too much state, he
      deserves great praise on account of the laws passed this session, by which
      the rigour of former statutes was much mitigated, and some security given
      to the freedom of the constitution.  All laws were repealed which
      extended the crime of treason beyond the statute of the twenty-fifth of
      Edward III.; all laws enacted during the late reign extending the crime of
      felony; all the former laws against Lollardy or heresy, together with the
      statute of the Six Articles.  None were to be accused for words, but
      within a month after they were spoken.  By these repeals several of
      the most rigorous laws that ever had passed in England were annulled; and
      some dawn, both of civil and religious liberty, began to appear to the
      people.  A repeal also passed of that law, the destruction of all
      laws, by which the King’s proclamation was made of equal force with
      a statute.—Ibid. vol. iii. p. 339.
    </p>
<p>
      Boiling to Death.
    </p>
<p>
      In the reign of Henry VIII. poisoners were, by Act of Parliament,
      condemned to be <i>boiled to death</i>.  This Act was repealed in the
      following reign.
    </p>
<p>
      In Germany, even in the seventeenth century, this horrible punishment was
      inflicted on coiners and counterfeiters.  Taylor, the Water Poet,
      describes an execution he witnessed in Hamburg in 1616.  The judgment
      pronounced against a coiner of false money was that he should ‘<i>be
      boiled to death in oil</i>; not thrown into the vessel at once, but with a
      pulley or rope to be hanged under the armpits, and then let down into the
      oil <i>by degrees</i>; first the feet, and next the legs, and so to boil
      his flesh from his bones alive.’—Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull’s
      Blue Laws, True and False, p. 13.
    </p>
<p>
      The Famous Stocking Case.
    </p>
<p>
      A woman and her daughter, <i>nine years old</i>, were hanged in Huntingdon
      for selling their souls to the devil, and raising a storm by pulling off
      their stockings!—Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull’s Blue Laws, True and
      False, p. 20.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTE 10, Chapter XVII. Enslaving.
    </p>
<p>
      So young a King and so ignorant a peasant were likely to make mistakes;
      and this is an instance in point.  This peasant was suffering from
      this law <i>by anticipation</i>; the King was venting his indignation
      against a law which was not yet in existence; for this hideous statute was
      to have birth in this little King’s <i>own reign</i>. However, we
      know, from the humanity of his character, that it could never have been
      suggested by him.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTES to Chapter XXIII. Death for Trifling Larcenies.
    </p>
<p>
      When Connecticut and New Haven were framing their first codes, larceny
      above the value of twelve pence was a capital crime in England—as it
      had been since the time of Henry I.—Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull’s
      Blue Laws, True and False, p. 17.
    </p>
<p>
      The curious old book called The English Rogue makes the limit thirteen
      pence ha’penny:  death being the portion of any who steal a
      thing ‘above the value of thirteen pence ha’penny.’
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTES to Chapter XXVII.
    </p>
<p>
      From many descriptions of larceny the law expressly took away the benefit
      of clergy:  to steal a horse, or a <i>hawk</i>, or woollen cloth from
      the weaver, was a hanging matter.  So it was to kill a deer from the
      King’s forest, or to export sheep from the kingdom.—Dr. J.
      Hammond Trumbull’s Blue Laws, True and False, p.13.
    </p>
<p>
      William Prynne, a learned barrister, was sentenced (long after Edward VI.’s
      time) to lose both his ears in the pillory, to degradation from the bar, a
      fine of 3,000 pounds, and imprisonment for life.  Three years
      afterwards he gave new offence to Laud by publishing a pamphlet against
      the hierarchy.  He was again prosecuted, and was sentenced to lose <i>what
      remained of his ears</i>, to pay a fine of 5,000 pounds, to be <i>branded
      on both his cheeks</i> with the letters S. L. (for Seditious Libeller),
      and to remain in prison for life.  The severity of this sentence was
      equalled by the savage rigour of its execution.—Ibid. p. 12.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>NOTES to Chapter XXXIII.
    </p>
<p>
      Christ’s Hospital, or Bluecoat School, ’the noblest
      institution in the world.’
    </p>
<p>
      The ground on which the Priory of the Grey Friars stood was conferred by
      Henry VIII. on the Corporation of London (who caused the institution there
      of a home for poor boys and girls). Subsequently, Edward VI. caused the
      old Priory to be properly repaired, and founded within it that noble
      establishment called the Bluecoat School, or Christ’s Hospital, for
      the <i>education</i> and maintenance of orphans and the children of
      indigent persons . . . Edward would not let him (Bishop Ridley) depart
      till the letter was written (to the Lord Mayor), and then charged him to
      deliver it himself, and signify his special request and commandment that
      no time might be lost in proposing what was convenient, and apprising him
      of the proceedings.  The work was zealously undertaken, Ridley
      himself engaging in it; and the result was the founding of Christ’s
      Hospital for the education of poor children. (The King endowed several
      other charities at the same time.) “Lord God,” said he,
      “I yield Thee most hearty thanks that Thou hast given me life thus
      long to finish this work to the glory of Thy name!”  That
      innocent and most exemplary life was drawing rapidly to its close, and in
      a few days he rendered up his spirit to his Creator, praying God to defend
      the realm from Papistry.—J. Heneage Jesse’s London:  its
      Celebrated Characters and Places.
    </p>
<p>
      In the Great Hall hangs a large picture of King Edward VI. seated on his
      throne, in a scarlet and ermined robe, holding the sceptre in his left
      hand, and presenting with the other the Charter to the kneeling Lord
      Mayor.  By his side stands the Chancellor, holding the seals, and
      next to him are other officers of state.  Bishop Ridley kneels before
      him with uplifted hands, as if supplicating a blessing on the event;
      whilst the Aldermen, etc., with the Lord Mayor, kneel on both sides,
      occupying the middle ground of the picture; and lastly, in front, are a
      double row of boys on one side and girls on the other, from the master and
      matron down to the boy and girl who have stepped forward from their
      respective rows, and kneel with raised hands before the King.—Timbs’
      Curiosities of London, p. 98.
    </p>
<p>
      Christ’s Hospital, by ancient custom, possesses the privilege of
      addressing the Sovereign on the occasion of his or her coming into the
      City to partake of the hospitality of the Corporation of London.—Ibid.
    </p>
<p>
      The Dining Hall, with its lobby and organ-gallery, occupies the entire
      storey, which is 187 feet long, 51 feet wide, and 47 feet high; it is lit
      by nine large windows, filled with stained glass on the south side; and
      is, next to Westminster Hall, the noblest room in the metropolis.  Here
      the boys, now about 800 in number, dine; and here are held the ’Suppings
      in Public,’ to which visitors are admitted by tickets issued by the
      Treasurer and by the Governors of Christ’s Hospital.  The
      tables are laid with cheese in wooden bowls, beer in wooden piggins,
      poured from leathern jacks, and bread brought in large baskets.  The
      official company enter; the Lord Mayor, or President, takes his seat in a
      state chair made of oak from St. Catherine’s Church, by the Tower; a
      hymn is sung, accompanied by the organ; a ‘Grecian,’ or head
      boy, reads the prayers from the pulpit, silence being enforced by three
      drops of a wooden hammer.  After prayer the supper commences, and the
      visitors walk between the tables.  At its close the ’trade-boys’
      take up the baskets, bowls, jacks, piggins, and candlesticks, and pass in
      procession, the bowing to the Governors being curiously formal.  This
      spectacle was witnessed by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert in 1845.
    </p>
<p>
      Among the more eminent Bluecoat boys are Joshua Barnes, editor of Anacreon
      and Euripides; Jeremiah Markland, the eminent critic, particularly in
      Greek Literature; Camden, the antiquary; Bishop Stillingfleet; Samuel
      Richardson, the novelist; Thomas Mitchell, the translator of Aristophanes;
      Thomas Barnes, many years editor of the London Times; Coleridge, Charles
      Lamb, and Leigh Hunt.
    </p>
<p>
      No boy is admitted before he is seven years old, or after he is nine; and
      no boy can remain in the school after he is fifteen, King’s boys and
      ‘Grecians’ alone excepted.  There are about 500
      Governors, at the head of whom are the Sovereign and the Prince of Wales.
       The qualification for a Governor is payment of 500 pounds.—Ibid.
    </p>
<p>
<br/><br/><br/>
</p>
<p>
      GENERAL NOTE.
    </p>
<p>
      One hears much about the ‘hideous Blue Laws of Connecticut,’
      and is accustomed to shudder piously when they are mentioned.  There
      are people in America—and even in England!—who imagine that
      they were a very monument of malignity, pitilessness, and inhumanity;
      whereas in reality they were about the first <i>sweeping departure from
      judicial atrocity</i> which the ‘civilised’ world had seen.
       This humane and kindly Blue Law Code, of two hundred and forty years
      ago, stands all by itself, with ages of bloody law on the further side of
      it, and a century and three-quarters of bloody English law on <i>this</i>
      side of it.
    </p>
<p>
      There has never been a time—under the Blue Laws or any other—when
      above <i>fourteen</i> crimes were punishable by death in Connecticut.
       But in England, within the memory of men who are still hale in body
      and mind, <i>two hundred and twenty-three</i> crimes were punishable by
      death! {10}  These facts are worth knowing—and worth thinking
      about, too.
    </p>
<p>
<br/> <br/>
</p>

</body>
</html>
</section></body></html>
</section></body></html>